---
layout: page
title: free $R$-module on a single generator
permalink: /context/free_$r$-module_on_a_single_generator
---
The following covariant functors are representable.\n1. The identity functor $1_\cat{Set} \colon \cat{Set} \to \cat{Set}$ is represented by the singleton set $1$. That is, for any set $X$, there is a natural isomorphism $\cat{Set}(1,X) \cong X$ that defines a bijection between elements $x \in X$ and functions $x \colon 1 \to X$ carrying the singleton element to $x$. Naturality says that for any $f \colon X \to Y$, the diagram\n$$ \xymatrix{ \cat{Set}(1,X) \ar[d]_{f_*} \ar[r]^-\cong & X \ar[d]^f \\ \cat{Set}(1,Y) \ar[r]_-\cong & Y}$$ commutes, i.e., that the composite function $1 \xrightarrow{x} X \xrightarrow{f} Y$ corresponds to the element $f(x) \in Y$, as is evidently the case.\n2. The forgetful functor $U \colon \cat{Group} \to \cat{Set}$ is represented by the group $\ZZ$. That is, for any group $G$, there is a natural isomorphism $\cat{Group}(\ZZ,G) \cong UG$ that associates, to every element $g \in UG$, the unique homomorphism $\ZZ \to G$ that maps the integer 1 to $g$. This defines a bijection because every homomorphism $\ZZ \to G$ is determined by the image of the generator $1$; that is to say, $\ZZ$ is the **free group on a single generator**. This bijection is natural because the composite group homomorphism $\ZZ \xrightarrow{g} G \xrightarrow{\phi} H$ carries the integer 1 to $\phi(g) \in H$.\n3. For any unital ring $R$, the forgetful functor $U \colon \cat{Mod}_R \to \cat{Set}$ is represented by the $R$-module $R$. That is, there is a natural bijection between $R$-module homomorphisms $R \to M$ and elements of the underlying set of $M$, in which $m \in UM$ is associated to the unique $R$-module homomorphism that carries the multiplicative identity of $R$ to $m$; this is to say, $R$ is the **free $R$-module on a single generator**. This explains the appearance of the abelian group $\ZZ$ and the vector space $\kk$ in Definition \ref{defn:monoid-cases}, where maps with these domains were used to specify elements in the codomains.\n4. The functor $U \colon \cat{Ring} \to \cat{Set}$ is represented by the unital ring $\ZZ[x]$, the polynomial ring in one variable with integer coefficients. A unital ring homomorphism $\ZZ[x] \to R$ is uniquely determined by the image of $x$; put another way, $\ZZ[x]$ is the **free unital ring on a single generator**.\n5. The functor $U(-)^n \colon \cat{Group} \to \cat{Set}$ that sends a group $G$ to the set of $n$-tuples of elements of $G$ is represented by the **free group** $F_n$ **on $n$ generators**. Similarly, the functor $U(-)^n \colon \cat{Ab} \to \cat{Set}$ is represented by the **free abelian group** $\Directsum_n \ZZ$ **on $n$ generators**.\n6. More generally, any group presentation, such as\n$$S_3 \coloneqq \Big\langle s,t \Bigm| s^2=t^2=1, sts=tst \Big\rangle,$$ defines a functor $\cat{Group} \to \cat{Set}$ that carries a group $G$ to the set $$ \Big\{ (g_1, g_2) \in G^2 \Bigm| g_1^2 = g_2^2 =e, g_1g_2g_1 = g_2g_1g_2 \Big\}.$$ The functor is represented by the group admitting the given presentation, in this case by the symmetric group $S_3$ on three elements: the presentation tells us that homomorphisms $S_3 \to G$ are classified by pairs of elements $g_1,g_2 \in G$ satisfying the listed relations.\n7. The functor $(-)^\times \colon \cat{Ring} \to \cat{Set}$ that sends a unital ring to its set of units is represented by the ring $\ZZ[x,x^{-1}]$ of Laurent polynomials in one variable. That is to say, a ring homomorphism $\ZZ[x,x^{-1}] \to R$ may be defined by sending $x$ to any unit of $R$ and is completely determined by this assignment, and moreover there are no ring homomorphisms that carry $x$ to a non-unit.\n8. The forgetful functor $U \colon \cat{Top} \to \cat{Set}$ is represented by the singleton space: there is a natural bijection between elements of a topological space and continuous functions from the one-point space.\n9. The functor $\ob \colon \cat{Cat} \to \cat{Set}$ that takes a small category to its set of objects is represented by the terminal category $\1$: a functor $\1 \to \cC$ is no more and no less than a choice of object in $\cC$.\n10. The functor $\mor \colon \cat{Cat} \to \cat{Set}$ that takes a small category to its set of morphisms is represented by the category $\2$: a functor $\2 \to \cC$ is no more and no less than a choice of morphism in $\cC$. In this sense, the category $\2$ is the **free** or **walking arrow**.\n11. The functor $\fun{iso} \colon \cat{Cat} \to \cat{Set}$ that takes a small category to its set of isomorphisms (pointing in a specified direction) is represented by the category $\mathbb{I}$, with two objects and exactly one morphism in each hom-set. In this sense, the category $\mathbb{I}$ is the **free** or **walking isomorphism**.\n12. The functor $\fun{comp} \colon \cat{Cat} \to \cat{Set}$ that takes a small category to the set of composable pairs of morphisms in it is represented by the category $\3$. Generalizing, the ordinal $\mathbbe{n}+\1 = 0 \to 1 \to \cdots \to n$ represents the functor that takes a small category to the set of paths of $n$ composable morphisms in it.\n13. The forgetful functor $U \colon \cat{Set}_* \to \cat{Set}$ is represented by the two-element based set: based functions out of this set correspond naturally and bijectively to elements of the target based set, the element in question being the image of the non-basepoint element.\n14. The functor $\fun{Path} \colon \cat{Top} \to \cat{Set}$ that carries a topological space to its set of paths and the functor $\fun{Loop} \colon \cat{Top}_* \to \cat{Set}$ that carries a based space to its set of based loops are each representable by definition, by the unit interval $I$ and the based circle $S^1$, respectively. A **path** in $X$ is a continuous function $I \to X$ while a (based)  **loop** in $X$ is a based continuous function $S^1 \to X$.
